[#2122] Accessibility guide (#2134)
epicmaxco/vuestic-ui: packages/ui/src/components/AccessibilityGuide.md

# 1. Accessibility guide

We want to provide following accessibility features:
- roles & aria attributes,
- keyboard accessibility,
- proper typography, colors and contrast ratio.

> **Source of truth:** https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles

Reviewer: As additional URL I'll suggest to use the W3C standarts: https://www.w3.org/standards/webdesign/accessibility

## 1.1. Roles & aria attributes

Every tag has its role and list of attributes related to it. For example, `<button />` tag has
`button` role. If you are forced to use an unsuitable tag (`div` as `button`) you can append the proper role, so it will be equal to the tag `button`:

`<div role="button" />`

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> For example, dropdown anchor is not actually button, but behaive like button.
```

Examples make easier to understand.

**Role doesn't influence visual state of the tag. It's used only by screen-readers and has no effect for regular browsers.**

> As mentioned, every role has a list of attributes, related to it. Some of them specific to the role, others - common for all (or almost for all).

Reviewer: `attributes, related` - extra comma.

> As mentioned, every role has a list of attributes, related to it. Some of them specific to the role, others - common for all (or almost for all).

Reviewer: `attributes, related` - extra comma.

For example, `button` role has specific attributes:
- `aria-pressed`,
- `aria-expanded` etc.

And some common:
- `aria-label`,
- `aria-labeledby`,

> - `aria-disabled` etc.

Reviewer 2: Any link with full list of aria attributes will be appreciated.

> Try to append as much aria-attributes as possible, because it will give the additional information for screen-readers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note**
> Try to append as much aria-attributes as possible, because it will give the additional information for screen-readers.
```

> **How can you understand, which roles & aria-attributes belong to the one or another block?** Human logic, source of truth and Google (`okey, google, tabs accessibility`).

Reviewer: Move the sentence to the new line.

```suggestion
**How can you understand, which roles & aria-attributes belong to the one or another block?**
Human logic, source of truth and [Google](https://letmegooglethat.com/?q=tab+accessibility).
```

Some other ground rules:
- pure graphics (like icons) which aren't used as button or link may be hidden via `aria-hidden` attribute;
- all images should have `alt` attribute, even it's empty, **very important**;

> - all links must contain text, describing where user will be taken by them (home page, cart etc.). In case of images-links use `aria-label` attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- all links must contain text, which describes where user will be taken by them (home page, cart etc.). In case of images-links use `aria-label` attribute.
```

## 1.2. Keyboard accessibility

Every interactive item should be accessible via `Tab` button (should have `tabindex="0"` attribute).

Some other ground rules:
- `focused` state should be highlighted via `focus-outline` SCSS mixin;

> - `tabindex` attribute can be `-1` (excluded from tab navigation) or `0`, no other values;

Reviewer 2: Why no others? Isn't index helpful?

Author: No.

el 1, tabindex 0 => order 1
el 2, tabindex 0 => order 2
el 3, tabindex 0 => order 3

=======

el 1, tabindex 0 => order 2
el 2, tabindex 1 => order 1
el 3, tabindex 0 => order 3

Or there will be a lot of such situations.

- elements with `tabindex="0"` shouldn't be hidden via `aria-hidden="true"` attribute;
- interaction with an element should be available via `enter`, `space` or other keys (list of them is specified in the source of truth for each role).

## 1.3. Typography and colors

> Build-in font sizes, colors & contrast ratio should be fully accessible (soon, some accessibility features are waiting for 1.5.0 version). 

Reviewer: Typo: `build-in` -> `built-in`.

> Anyway, feel free to create an issue if you've mentioned some problems.

Reviewer: I think here is an extra new line.

# 2. Checking accessibility

> We use Lighthouse from ChromeDevTools & manual testing.

Reviewer 2: What is manual testing? For example things like https://webaim.org/resources/contrastchecker/?

Author: For this item I've meant tab-accessibility checks first of all.

# 2.1. Lighthouse

> After a few moments you'll gain a report:

Reviewer: Looks like here is missing an intro.

Author: Have no ideas what to include here :) I guest intro was above.

![](http://joxi.ru/Vm6jNGjH3d5YWm.jpg)

Check it and try to fix listed problems:

![](http://joxi.ru/DrlxdGxcKO8g5r.jpg)

Also, you are able to investigate how screen-reader will parse the element via `Accessibility` tab:

> ![](http://joxi.ru/zAN7wb7s1znnBr.jpg)

Reviewer: @asvae, @m0ksem, @RVitaly1978 maybe we should place screenshots in the repository or give a link to [this](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/accessibility/reference/)?

Author: Yeah, also planned to raise this question. Joxi isn't the best choice.
